and so I was going to work almost every
day at Northwestern and going to the top
floor of the garage and you know hanging
my legs over the top just staring down
and thinking about throwing myself off
the building just killing myself cuz I
thought you know I had no friends I've
never even gone on a date
I had no friends I'd never even gone on
a date
I mean I'd actually done a lot of
organizing to that point I mean I'd
actually done a lot of were in izing to
that point I had no friends I've never
even gone on a date had nothing in my
life like because I you know it was just
so socially awkward and stilted from you
know at that point 25 years of a lot of
isolation basically only interactive in
the animals not having a lot of human
friends I just didn't see any hope I was
like if I can't be a professor what's
the point
um and and I really came pretty close to
killing myself but the thing that
prevented me was I thought well if I go
I should try and do something good for
the world and even at that point you
know I I wasn't a full-fledged animal
rights activist I I mean I'd actually
done a lot of organizing to that point
at organizing college in law school but
I didn't see myself as an animal arts
actives I just saw myself as someone he
was a professor or graduate student who
also did handle nights actives on the
side but I did think that animal rights
was the most important thing in the
world and I just honestly just never
thought it was my problem and I never
thought or if I did think it was my
problem
I didn't think there's a whole lot I can
do about it I thought my role in solving
the problem was just writing that was
what I was good I was a writer and a
researcher and then when I lost that I
thought well you know there's I can't do
that anymore so what I do and I decided
well I mean it's it's time to take
direct action you know if you don't
really care about your life that much
are your own well-being you know why
don't you just go directly into one of
these slaughterhouses and try to help on
the animals I think it would be a little
bit intellectually lazy to end this
video by just pointing the finger at
Wayne and calling him a liar I think
that what's going on here is a little
bit more complex and it's not just the
content creators who are involved in a
kind of self-deception it is much more
importantly members of the audience who
are indulging in self-deception of the
three secret origin stories that Wayne
has presented for how he became a
die-hard vegan activist and how he
discovered the secret formula for direct
action ever where's methods of activism
none of them are really plausible none
of them are believable and the contrast
between them isn't flattering it's even
more bizarre when you're aware of the
extent to which major foundational
principles of what DXE was supposed to
be were set forward as if as if they had
come to wane in a bolt of lightning as
an epiphany as a great inspiration and
then so easily they were abandoned one
after another I mean the real definition
of what this organization was its raison
d'etre its defining motivations
objectives methods organization
organizational hierarchy shall we say or
lack thereof those things changed in the
wind and the emphasis on fundraising and
what they were fundraising for that all
crept in later so it's not even so much
striking that these are lies or that the
stories are inconsistent or that they
can't possibly true it's very easy for
me to imagine that from Wayne's
perspective all three of the stories are
true or that the story is telling now is
true he may feel that the story is
telling now is more true than the
stories he told in the past this is more
honest in coming forward to this
evocative image of whether Wayne's young
was suicidal or not in the past whether
or not he had no friends and had ever
been on a date when he'd already been
organizing vegan activist events for
several years or look how true any of
this is or how consistently and
accurately he's reporting the timeline
or voice then he might just be being
wistful rather than being dishonest you
know some of us middle-aged people get
wistful you know oh I think the really
profound corrupting influence here is
fundraising itself and ironically direct
action everywhere was founded with an
acute awareness of how corrupting
fundraising could be that they began
with bold declarations on their website
I remember seeing them in text rather
than in video or in audio interviews
were they were declaring that unlike
peda unlike these other organizations
they were not going to be doing
fundraising they'd accept donations for
some kind of limited purpose but that
really they were going to be this social
network that spent their time recruiting
people
they wanted you and they wanted your
time and they didn't want your money and
they weren't gonna do fundraising and
they were aware that fundraising and
kind of devoured other movements and
organizations and in some ways corrupted
them in the big moment now I've been
speaking to a lot of insiders from
direct action before present insiders
and past insiders who left lately and
one of them gave me a kind of nothing
anecdote an anecdote that to you guys
the audience wouldn't seem shocking but
to me it was really evocative it was
really stirring because it's such a
contrast in my own life and my life with
with my girlfriend Melissa and the
things I would never do and never think
of doing in vegan activism and it was
just an anecdote that described that
Wayne and Priya so they're boyfriend and
girlfriend Wayne and his girlfriend
Priya that they'd struggled for some
years or at least some months to have
Priya really give kind of leading
lectures for her to be kind of the main
face the person in front of the podium
when they did events but they struggled
with the fact that when priya was the
main speaker or the only speaker they'd
get less than $500 in donations they'd
get much owes me and when Wayne was on
the microphone when Wayne was doing the
main speech when he was wrapping it up
with he's very passionate emotive
appeals to the audience they'd be
getting more than $1000 donations now I
mean that's very striking and very
stirring to me for many different
reasons but one of them is the first
thought in my mind was I have never done
that I never would do that and this is
this is real church basement style
fundraising where they were giving this
rousing speech but again Wayne was
better at giving the speeches in the
prayer and then literally you know
passing around a hat for people to put
donations they pass around a bowl or a
box you know whatever it is but people
would just be giving cash donations
maybe they'd also accept checks I
shouldn't say that but whatever they
were accepting donations on the spot
spontaneously given in response to this
emotional peel glance I would absolutely
never do that I regard that as like an
aspect of 19th century politics that was
barely acceptable in the twentieth
century and then I'm really proud that
we can leave behind in the 21st century
I have done fundraising you guys know
for a court case once where I needed
money to be donated for legal fees for a
specific project if I'm gonna illustrate
a children's storybook or make a
children's cartoon you know it's vegan
to promote veganism through fiction I
can imagine people donating money for
that but then that's it for a specific
project you're gonna see where the money
goes you're gonna get accounting of how
the money is spent and also you're gonna
get something back from it you know okay
you donated $100 to publish this book
but you know we're gonna send you a copy
of the book you know in the mail and
maybe a stuffed animal or a t-shirt
there's something that goes with the
story book that model of crowdfunding of
donations that are transparent and
accountable and project specific that
I'm totally at peace with but the the
church basement style of fundraising I'm
profoundly uncomfortable with and this
issue of Wayne slipping away step by
step from his own truth or maybe getting
more and more comfortable with oh um
broadcasting his emotional desperation
which wasn't there in version one of the
story and wasn't there in version two of
the story right in version one of the
story this was really kind of a cold
rational decision well I apparently like
many people I've met many many people
who were extremely disappointed with law
school extremely disappointed with the
practice of the law whether they were in
corporate law or human rights law this
was an unbelievably boring bureaucratic
job they didn't want to do and then one
way or another we're looking for way to
get out of law school or get out of
legal practice and go into humanitarian
work believe me some of those people go
to Cambodia where I met them but even
within Canada you know there are a lot
of disillusioned lawyers looking for
something meaningful to thrive where the
original narrative was he was one of
these disillusioned lawyers wanting to
make the world a better place and he
made a kind of rational calculated
decision that the way to do it was gonna
be through veganism animal rights um you
know version two of this story which was
tied to this message about quote-unquote
social science research that's a
powerful story in its own way that he
was giving out pamphlets and giving up
pamphlets and one day decided look the
pamphlets just don't work he's got to
take on a new direction
that narrative the problem with it now
is they've really abandoned that
approach to freaking activism there is
another group there's a splinter group
that broke off from DXE that is called
something like the sentience foundation
the sentience Institute I think and
that's one famous or notorious former
member of the XC left DXE and if you
read the definition of their doing in
many ways they're like returning to
those promises from direct action
everywhere around the Year 2015
they're saying hey wait this was
supposed to be about social science
research this was supposed to be about
some kind of carefully constructed
mythology linked to the history of
slavery history of feminism how women
got the right to vote doing social
science research but what's effective
and what's not
whether historically or presently about
you know performance baptism where they
really went back to that so the problem
with with Wayne's second version of the
founding myth of his inspiration to
convene Idris and they the lightning
bolt that created - right - ever
is that it no longer relates to what the
right action ever was all about today
with direct action ever was all about
are these quote-unquote animal rescue
operations like cattle wrestling going
in stealing animals from slaughterhouses
in factory farms and creating lurid
spectacles on the internet out of that
and trying to get newspaper pipelines
into that there and getting themselves
arrested and then trying to make
newspaper headlines and you know get
notoriety and fame out of being arrested
and going to prison or at least going to
court you know that's that's the core of
their current methodology not based on
social science research per day and then
beyond that they do a lot of stunts that
were similar to what peda People for the
Ethical Treatment of Animals did in the
early 1990s yet all about headlines
Nutter and say oh so now there's this
need for a new mythology for a new story
and the focus of the news story is about
direct action everywhere current lion
ization of self-sacrifice of going to
prison of getting arrested of of
self-destructive desperate forms of
activism and advocacy right that's
that's the emphasis now that and so we
now portrays himself as someone who is
suicidal
but therefore willing to break the law
willing to break into slaughterhouses or
break into farms and steal things and go
to prison he's trying to put himself on
the ragged edge of hopelessness poverty
suicide the narrative is shifting and he
himself may not be intentionally lying
he may not be aware of the
inconsistencies in his story and above
all else he may not be aware of the
extent to which handing around the
donation cup handing around the hat for
people to put money in again and again
and again not ten times not 20 of times
hundreds of times he and his girlfriend
Priya have stood in front of a crowd and
tried to say something emotionally
evocative and you know moving in this
way to get them to put money in that hat
and that will have a profoundly
corrupting influence on them again and
again as they try to tell a story in a
way that connects to the audience as
they try to say what that audience wants
to hear as just like an old-fashioned
Christian preacher they may start by
thinking they're teaching the one true
doctrine what they end up teaching is
whatever the audience wants to hear
because what they desperately need is
that affirmation of a positive response
from the audience and ultimately for the
audience to open up their wallets and
hand over their money with absolutely no
clear expectations or promises on the
other side about where that money is
going to go how it's going to be spent
what the outcomes being returned to that
audience are supposed to be disrespect
my truth but the fact is that you know
my name is I don't know